---
author: Michael
layout: post
---

Perhaps because I've been a software developer my entire professional career (and for some
time pre-professional), I tend to prefer thinking in a precise way.  I'm actually not sure
if my Development experience has enforced that, or if I became a developer because of
that, but regardless, that's how it is.  But to me, things are what they are, and you
should call them what they are, because that's what they are.

I've never been good at "spin", and a recent mantra of mine which I only half-jokingly use
is `#MarketingRuinsEverything`.  That's not true of course, and I have a lot of friends
and colleagues that are "Marketing People", and they have to make a living and eat too but
some of that still gets under my skin.

Also, I well understand that language is an amorphous, made up blob of knowledge that
works because it is commonly held among individuals in a given audience, and that it
changes over time and common meanings (as long as they are common!) ebb and flow with
time.  One of my [favorite videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7E-aoXLZGY) from one
of my favorite people says this much better than I can.  Of course, there is also [this
one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=om7O0MFkmpw) from one of my favorite comedians which
is a bit of a counterpoint, and yet I love them both.  People are funny.

So, that said, 2 things which I know are both irrational given the above, I tend to see
more often, and they just bother me for their imprecision (or perhaps, accuracy).  "Pi is
3" is more accurate than "Pi is 4.21231", but less precise.  Anyway...

The first one is the misuse of "average".  Everyone seems to use use "average" on the
wrong thing, like "The average American family has 2.3 kids".  No.  No no no.  You're not
averaging "Americans" or even "the American family", you're averaging the number of kids.
It SHOULD be, "On average, American families have 2.3 kids", or "American families have an
average of 2.3 kids.", or even, "American families have 2.3 kids, on average."

The second one is "...times less than..." or "...times lower than..." or any number of
ways to indicate a lesser-than/fewer-than relationship, in terms of some multiple.  As a
developer I see this most often in performance claims.  "The new code is 4x slower than
the old code."  What?  How can it be "4 times slower".  _ONE_ times slower would be
... stopped.  The "times" relates to the original, or higher value, so multiplying by that
value even once then subtracting, zeroes it out.

Along these lines is "Product A is 3x cheaper than Product B."  Again, "_ONE_ times
cheaper" would be free.

Yes, yes, I get it.  "4x slower" means it runs at 1/4 the rate; "3x cheaper" means 1/3 the
cost.  But for the love of god, just say that.

It's probably confirmation bias, but I'm seeing this more and more, more and more often.
I guess it's part of the "language changes, and as long as everyone knows what you mean it
has done its job".  So I'll get over it, but maybe, just maybe, if a few people recognize
this in their own writing and redo it, I'll see this up to 2x less often.
